---
layout: single
title:  "Creating a Watch Dogs-type app"
toc: true
hidden: true
---

The premise of Ubisoft's Watch Dogs video game series has always fascinated me. Some of the exploits you can pull off with your in-game cell phone are far fetched but most are genuinely possible with the right amount of software work. I've personally always been a fan of [rooftopping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rooftopping), moreso the aspect of getting to the roof since every building is almost like a puzzle some of which require a significant amount of critical thinking. Over time, rooftopping in my hometown became relatively dull because I knew virtually every building inside and out but with the extensive amount of buildings I have been to came a need to store critical bits of information such as which stairwell to take or what security measures are in place. Furthermore, I dove into the world of RFID hacking a couple years ago and have been collecting RFID credentials where possible to provide me with unrestricted access to these places. 

I decided to create an app that unifies all of this information in a single place and automatically loads the relevant information/emulates the relevant RFID fob based on my location such that I can use my phone to effortlessly go where I please, as you would in Watch Dogs. Furthermore, I added a 'tools' section where I can include other network-based exploits on my phone and take advantage of flaws such as the [Hikvision Auth Key Explot](https://packetstormsecurity.com/files/144097/Hikvision-IP-Camera-Access-Bypass.html) to obtain snapshots of any IP cameras on the same network as my phone.

# System Overview

The system consists solely of the user's mobile device and a server that stores building data.